# Lecture 4

## Technology Challenges + Business Case

## Challenges

* *Scale and Spread* -  QoS has to be ensured
* *Shared by users* - Security and privacy
* *Much larger than traditional computing environments* - bound to fail. How do you recover?
* *Heterogenous environments* - interoperability

## Note

Scale up - Increasing computing resources of a server
Scale out - Increasing number of servers

## Elasticity

Scaling up and down/in and out quickly.

* If it doesn't scale up/out like you want it to, then response times will be slower.
* If it doesn't scale down/in like you want it to, then user will be paying for things they aren't using.

## Performance unpredictability

Remember - There are many different computers, connected to one another. Systems are bound to fail. What happens to the workload assigned to a system when a system fails?
Performance unpredictability is a significant factor, and hence reliability is something we should try to ensure.

## Interoperability

* Made available through web services (which use RPCs). But developing these web services is complex.

## Portability

* Migrating applications from one cloud platform to another new platform must be seamlessly portable.
Otherwise there's a high chance of vendor lock-in.

## Availability

Two techniques used by cloud models to ensure high availability  - 

* failure detection
* application recovery

(application attributes which become very important in the context of cloud computing)

### Failure Detection - How to detect?

* Heartbeat
Every once in a while, a client initiates its health - sends pulses to server to signify it's alive.

* Probes
Server sends out a signal once in a while to all connected clients, checking if the clients are alive.

### Failure Detection - What to do next?

Redirect! After identifying failed instances, it is necessary to avoid routing new requests to these failed instances.
Commonly used mechanism in HTTP based protocols - HTTP-redirection

It is also necessary to recover old requests.
Appication Recovery! For this purpose, an application independent method is *checkpoint/restart* - infrastructure periodically saves the state of application (env variables, stack, heap, etc), i.e., snapshots are taken and stored in a different node.

If server A goes does, then requests are redirected to server B.
Because server B shouldn't have to start from scratch, server B restores the snapshot of server A, and B can continue from A's point of failure too.

## Inhibitors to adopting Cloud Computing

* Security
* Compliance
* Interoperability
* Vendor Lock-in

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Public Cloud

Public cloud - set of infrastructure. - resources. hosted by a vendor. available to public to use on a pay per use basis.

* vendor manages everything. you can sign up, and then use it - as an IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS.
* Available to all

## What makes it public?

* Resource Allocation - public can access and use the cloud services and virtual resources
* User agreements - more sensible from an economic perspective too - you don't need to pay for resources if you don't need them.
* Management - vendor handles things-upgrades, etc.

### Pros

* Low Cost
* Less server management
* Time Saving - somebody else does all the work
* Analytics
* Virtually unlimited scalability

### Cons

* Security
* Compliance
* Interoperability and vendor lock-in

## Private Cloud

* Uses in-house infrastructre to host different cloud services
* Proprietary environment dedicated to a single business entity
* Everything is exclusive and secure network
* No multi-organization multitenancy
* Restricted access

### Two Types

* Internal Private Cloud - internally housed/hosted
* Hosted Private Cloud - hosted by another provider

### Pros

* More control
* Privacy, Security and compliance
* Customizable

### Cons

* Cost - Initial cost of setting up and maintenance costs are high, and isn't amortized among multiple clients
* Everything must be handled in-house


### Factors influencing Private vs Public

* Cheap Solution, and "standard" security requirements - Public Cloud
* High Compliance (from a security perspective)? - Private Cloud
* Don't want multiorganization multitenancy? - Private Cloud
* User access - Public Cloud - Available to all. Private - available to only those who have authorization
* Adaptablility - Public Cloud - Not precise. Private - Suited to customer needs.
* Security - Public Cloud - very general. Private - Customizable, and more control.
* Infrastructure - Tons of infrastructure ?  Private cloud
* Infrastructure might prove to be insufficient and you may need elasticity? - Public cloud
* Network bandwith - high bandwidth ? Public cloud : private cloud

## Hybrid Cloud

Best of both - Public and Private cloud worlds

If/when the existng in-house private cloud infrastructure can't handle the scale, in addition to the private cloud, you can tunnel into a firewall connected to a public cloud, so that things scale out to a public cloud, which meets the demand, and once teh demand is met, you scale back in.

Ex - Monsah university - data is stored in the internal  private cloud, but as a backup mechansim it's also stored on a public cloud (AWS).
