# Lecture 3

## Trap and Emulate, and Binary Translation (CPU Virtualization)

## Recap

### Things to be virtualized

* CPU
* Memory
* I/O
* Network

### Informal Defintion of Virtualization

If a guest OS can run in a multi-tenant virtualized environment, where it can run both user instructions, and kernel instructions without failing, then the host OS is said to be virtualizable.

## Direct Execution

* The idea behind direct execution is to try and run the VM's instructions directly on the H/W.
* For most instructions that are executed  (like NoOp instructions), the performance observed in a virtualized env is comparable to that observed natively.
* But for other instructions, they cannot run in natively in a VMM
  * Syscalls run by a user application
  * H/W access -> sensitive instruction

## Direct Execution + Trap and Emulate

* Assume that Guest OS tries to execute a privileged instruction - like modifying a page table
* Guest apps run in Ring 3, Guest OS runs in Ring 1, VMM runs in Ring 0. Only Ring 0 can execute privileged instructions. Whenever other rings try to execute a privileged instruction, the instruction gets trapped, and the trapped instructions are emulated by the VMM.
* This is the Trap and Emulate strategy

## How to Trap and Emulate?

There are two categories of instructions

* User instructions - typically compute instructions
* System instructions - typically for system management

Two modes of CPU operation -

* User mode
* System mode

### Privileged and Non-privileged State

State of a process is privileged if -

* Access to state breaks VM's isolation boundaries
* It is needed by VMM to implement virtualization

Examples (privileged states) -

* MMU - VMM has to divide memory among VMs, access to MMU by a VM might allow it to access another VM's physical memory, breaking boundaries
* Interrupt Subsystem - CPU is shared through time multiplexing - access to interrupt enable flag would allow it to take over the CPU (and take control of resources esssentially)

Examples (non-privileged states) -

* General Purpose registers
* Floating point unit
(there may be cases when the monitor needs to reserve this state, and may become privileged)

### Normal System

```text
Ring 3 - Application (Ex - Srini's PPT)
Ring 0 - Traditional OS (Windows)
Physical Hardware
```

* If Application executes User instructions, it is forwarded on to the hardware by the OS, directly executed on hardware
* If Application tries to issue out a syscall/interuppt, the interrupt is trapped by the OS, the OS looks into the IVT, finds the base address of routine to be executed in the IVT, executes the routine, adn transfers back control to Application

#### Trap and Emulate Environment

* An application executes a noop. Doesn't require any translation. It passes through the Guest OS, which sees that it is a noop, and passes it on unchanged to the VMM.

* Guest OS issues a Privileged Instruction. Guest OS is operating in Ring 1. The privileged instruction is to be executed in ring 0. This instruction gets trapped, and emulated by the VMM. After the emulation, the instruction gets passed back to the Guest OS with whatever results.

* Application issues a Privileged Instruction (which causes an interrupt). Application is operating in Ring 3. The privileged instruction is to be executed in ring 0. VMM traps the Interrupt generated. The VMM only knows that this Interrupt was caused by `X Guest Application` (user process) belonging to the `Y Guest OS`. VMM doesn't know how to handle the Interrupt, but the `Y Guest OS` does (`Y Guest OS` has an IVT). VMM has the base address to the IVT of `Y Guest OS`. VMM passes the Interrupt to the `Y Guest OS`. The `Y Guest OS` looks into its IVT, finds the routine to be executed, and those instructions get executed. After the instructions are executed, the call gets returned back to the VMM, which in turn passes it back to the `X Guest Application`.

* This can happen for memory instructions, CPU instructions, and I/O instructions.

## "Strictly Virtualizable"

A processor, or a mode of processor is said to be strictly virtualizable,

* all instructions that access privileged state trap
* all instructions either trap or execute identically

## Types of Instructions

### Sensitive Instructions

Any instruction that modifies the hardware

### Privileged Instructions

Instructions that can be executed only in the kernel mode

## Issues with Trap and Emulate Virtualization

* Performance overhead
* It is time-consuming. There's a lot happening, and a lot of indirections (trap, passing to IVT in guest OS, execution in Guest OS, passed back to VMM, passed back to guest application). All this is expensive in terms of time.
* Not all architectures support it
  * x86 is not virtualizable, as it has instructions that can run in both user mode, and kernel mode\
    Example - `popf` - sensitive instruction\
    `popf` can be used to modify a data structure in CPU called `ESTACK` - a bunch of flags.\
    One such flag, is an `ALU flag`, which can be modified in user mode (ring 1).\
    It can also modify the `interrupt flag`, which can be modified only in (Ring 0)\
    Because `popf` can execute in user mode also, if it tries to modify the `interrupt delivery flag`, but is executed ring 1 or 2 or 3, it won't trap (as the instruction has a behaviour defined in user mode also). It will just fail silently.\
    There are  17 such instructions in x86.

## Trap and Emulate Exercise

* Guest OS tries to modify page tables so that `gvp` can point to `gpp`.
* Modifying page tables involves accessing privileged state. So, hypervisor traps this privileged instruction.
* Once it traps it, Hypervisor maps the `gpp` (which is VM's memory's page table) to `hpp` (which is your actual physical memory, from which you've provisioned resources for VMM)
* Loads page table to get `gvp` to point to `hpp`
* (TLB manipulation is skipped)

## Popek and Goldberg Principle

* Instructions that modify hardware are sensitive instructins
* Instructions that run in kernel mode are privileged instructions
* Sensitive Instructions must always be a subset of privileged instructions

## Binary Translation

* Primarily for instructions that cannot be "trap-and-emulate"-ed.
* Replacement of sensitive instructions with traps.
* This is done at Run Time, NOT compile time.
* Translates each VM instruction to minimal set of host instructions.
* CPU of VMM is just a thread and not a real CPU. The "CPU" state is kept in a software structure (e.g. - VCPU)
* Memory is also emulated/relocated
* Occurs basic block by basic block (simple block which has sequential/"straight line" execution for every line in the block + return logic only. no callouts/conditional branches) - either inline Greplacements, or call-outs.
* The replaced instructions are put into a "Translation Cache". Instructions are executed from translation cache, and not the guest code.
* Control flow changes - have to replace with the right set of addresses of instructions
