# Lecture 5b

## I/O Virtualization

IOV uses software to abstract upper-layer protocols from physical connections/transports

* Manages routing of I/O requests between virtual devices and shared physical hardware

## 3 ways to implement I/O Virtualization

* Full Device Emulation
* Para Virtualization
* Direct I/O

### Full Device Emulation

* Emulates the entire real-world device
* All functions of device/bus infrastructure (device identification, interrupts, DMA, etc) are replicated in software
* This software is in the VMM, and acts as a virtual device
* Guest OS's I/O access requests are trapped by VMM (fault is raised when a Guest OS process tries to access an I/O device, which causes a trap), which interacts with I/O devices
* The trap results in emulation. The addresses would get converted to the real address. The real addresses would pushed onto the I/O stack. From the I/O stack the address would get popped to the real device driver, which actually performs whatever I/O request was initially received.

```text
Guest OS
Guest Device Driver

                            Virtual Device
Virtualization Layer -      Device Emulation
                            I/O Stack
                            Device Driver
Real Device
```

* Device driver isn't modified

### Functions of Virtualization Layer

* Emulate real-world device
* Remap guest and real I/O addresses
* Multiplexes and drives the physical device
* Provide support for I/O features - COW, DMA, etc.

## Para-I/O Virtualization

* aka "Split Driver Model" - has a frontend driver and backend driver
* The frontend driver is running in Domain U. The backend driver is running in Domain 0. They interact via a block of shared memory
* Frontend driver - manage I/O request of Guest OS (takes the real addresses)
* Backend driver - manage real I/O device and multiplex I/O data of different VMs. Actual driver for the physical device (regular driver used by OS when they're used natively)
* Frontend driver has to be modified, because it explicitly needs to take the device operations made by apps in the guests, and put them together in a special message that is directly passed to the backend driver (sort of like wrappers for the actual device API). The backend driver doesn't necessarily have to be modified.
* Application makes requests for device operations. Frontend device driver treats these operations in a special way, i.e., does not try to actually access/emulate the physical device, but instead passes the messages over to the back-end driver (using shared memory), which processes these requests, and interacts with the actual device.
* Having a "centralized" backend component, will allow for multiplexing, i.e., the backend driver can accept/receive requests from all Guest VMs in the system, and then decide which VM gets to execute the physical device access.
* Limited to paravirtualized VMs
* Better device performance, but higher CPU overhead
* More options for better management and access control of devices

## Direct I/O Virtualization

* Allows VMs to bypass the VMM, and access devices directly
* Achieves close-to-native performance, without high CPU costs
* Enables a device to directly perform DMA to/from host memory
* `Intel VT-x Technology` - allows a VM to have direct access to a physical address (allows device drivers to directly write to registers concerning an IO device )
* `Intel VT-d Technology` - enables IO devices to be able to write directly to the memory space of a virtual machine
* Limited Scalability - One physical device can be assigned to only one VM
