# Lecture 6

VMMs perform machine switches like OS performs context switching

## Goldberg/Popek Principles

### 3 Requirements for an architecture to efficiently support virtualization

* Equivalence/Fidelity - Program running on VM should behave essentially identical to a program executing directly on hardware
* Resource Control - VMM must be in total control of virtualized resources
* Efficiency - Great majority of machine instructions must be executed without intervention of the VMM (without traps)

### Virtual Machine - Definition and Desirable Qualities

An Efficient, Isolated, Duplicate of the physical machine

* Efficient - Low performance overhead - Performance is close to the real machine
* Isolated - Safety/Isolation - Each VM must be isolated from one another
* Duplicate - Equivalence - Interface must be same as the real machine's interface

### VMM

Software that creates and manages VMs

## Classification of Instructions

* Privileged Instructions\
Those that trap if processor is in user mode, and do not trap if it is in system/kernel mode (instructions that can run only in privileged mode)

* Sensitive instructions\
Instructions that change hardware state, which must be emulated
  * Control Sensitive Instructions\
  Those that attempt to change the configuration of resources in the system, i.e., modify the system registers.

  * Behaviour Sensitive Instructions\
  Those whose behaviour/result depends on the mode/configuration of the hardware (content of relocation register or the mode of processor (user/kernel))

* Critical Instructions\
Sensitive Instructions that do not change state

## Popek and Goldberg Theorems

### Theorem 1

```text
For any conventional third generation computer, a VMM may be constructed if the set of sensitive instructions for that computer is a subset of privileged instructions
```

#### TLDR - 1

Sensitive instructions must always be a subset of privileged instructions.\
Any instruction that modifies the hardware state must be a privilieged instruction.\
The corollary is true too.

### Theorem 2

```text
A conventional third generation computer is recursively virtualizable if it is
* it is virtualizable
* a VMM without any timing dependencies can be constructed for it
```

* If classic virtualization (trap and emulate technique) can't be applied (because of critical instructions), use binary translation.

#### TLDR - 2

* Recursive virtualization -
  * Ability to have a VM which has a VMM + VM within itself
  * Conditions under which a VMM that can run a copy of itself can be built

* "Timing dependencies" clause - Performance of VMM running on real machine and VMM running on another VMM should be indistinguishable. If VMM has timing dependencies, then certain instruction sequences will take longer to execute. Hence, VMM should not have timing dependencies.

### Theorem 3

```text
A hybrid virtual machine monitor may be constructed for any conventional third generation machine in which the set of USER sensitive instructions are a subset of the set of privileged instructions
```

* Very few third gen architectures are virtualizable. So, relax the definition to more general, less efficient form, which we label a "Hybrid Virtual Machine".
* HVM - structure is almost identical to a VM system, but more instructions are interpreted rather than being directly executed.
* To specify the "relaxed conditions", we need to divide class of sensitive instructions into 2 not necessarily disjoint subsets - `user sensitive` and `supervisor sensitive`
* An instruction _i_ is `user sensitive` is there is a state `S = <E, u, P, R>`, for which _i_ is control sensitive or behaviour sensitive.
  * E - Executable Storage
  * u - Processor is in user mode
  * P - Program Counter
  * R - Relocation-bounds register
* Similarly, an instruction _i_ is `supervisor sensitive` if there is a state `S = <E, s, P, R>` for which _i_ is control sensitve or behaviour sensitive.

* Single point of difference between a HVM and a VMM is that, in HVM Monitor, all instructions in Virtual Supervisor mode will be interpreted.

#### TLDR - 3

* This theorem is like specialization of Theorem 1 but for Hybrid Virtual Monitors

## Reference

[Formal Requirements for Virtualizable Third Generation Architectures](https://www.princeton.edu/~rblee/ELE572Papers/Fall04Readings/secureOS/popek_virtualizable.pdf)
