# Lecture 7

## Live VM Migration

* VMs encapsulate an entire OS and all of its apps
* We want to transfer a running VM with all its apps and OS state as is to a target destination machine, where it continues to run as though nothing happened.
* State involves
  * Memory state
  * CPU execution state
  * State of IO devices - disk, network, etc.

* 2 Migration Manager processors at source and destination (outside the VMs)
  * Connect via TCP and talk to each other
  * At source, Migration Manager maps guest VM's memory contents + execution state into its own address space
  * Transfers VM's pages to target migration manager over TCP connection
  * At destination, Migration Manager would receive these states, and restore the VM's state and resumes execution

## Why Live VM Migration?

### Why Migrate?

* Load Balancing
* Server Maintenance and Upgrades
* Energy Savings - shutting down servers to reduce energy usage

### Why Live?

* Keep apps running in VMs alive and running
* Keep network connections alive
* TLDR; don't disrupt the user's experience, and enable them to have a seamless experience

### Why VM?

Why the whole VM? Isn't there a lot of things to move around? Why not just an individual process?\
Process migration is harder, as a lot of processes' state resides within the OS. That is, Process migration may also leave residual dependencies (state) at source host. Ex - shared memory, open files, etc. So, process migration would require extraction and insertion of state in new machine. Very tricky.

## Performance Goals in Live Migration

* Minimizing Downtime - downtime is amount of time for which VM isn't executing during the migration
* Reducing total end-to-end migration time (not the same as downtime)
* Avoiding interference with normal system activity. Migration shouldn't affect other VMs running on the source and destination systems
* Minimizing network activity. Other machines also use the network fabric. Minimizing network activity helps minimize network traffic and congestion.

## Simple Approaches to Live Migration

For simplicity, assume that we're in a LAN, and storage is available over a network.\
This leaves us with having to migrate only Memory, CPU, and I/O - which is primarily considered to be  network (for simplicity).

## Migrating Memory

### Pure Stop-and Copy
  
* (forget about liveness and all that for a second) (like Checkpoint and Restore)
* Freeze VM at source
* Copy the VM's pseudo-physical memory contents to target
* Restart VM at target
* TLDR - Take a checkpoint/snapshot of VM at source, tranfer it over to destination, and restart it there
* Longer downtime (as it continuous - VM doesn't come back up until  migration is fully done)
* Minimal total migration time = Downtime. VM will be down until the whole migration is done

### Pure Demand Paging

* Freeze VM at source
* Copy minimal execution context to target (PC, Registers, non-pageable memory (memory that can't be swapper)) to target
* Restart VM at target (minimal execution state)
* Pull memory contents from source as and when needed (when page faults occur)
* VM starts executing at target quicker, but is initially slow (slow warm-up phase) due to page-faults occuring, and having the needing the corresponding data to be transferred across network
* Smaller downtime
* Total migration time is indefinite (memory might be left behind in source VM if page faults were never raised for that memory)

### Pre-Copy

* Copy memory first, and then migrate the VM
* Don't freeze VM at source - let it continue to run
* While the source VM is running, copy the memory from source to target, over multiple iterations
  * First iteration, copy all pages\
  But while these pages are getting copied, some pages are likely to be modified in the source VM
  * Each subsequent iteration - copy pages that were dirtied by the source VM during the previous iteration

* Do a short stop-and-copy when number of dirty pages is "small enough"\
Our hope is that in each subsequent iteration, we've to copy over fewer pages. If this comes true, then at one point, there will be no/very little dirty pages left. Then, we can freeze source VM, and move over the few dirty pages left (if any). And then, move the CPU state, and IO state over to the destination. The destination Migration Manager now has all the state it needs, so it can restore the state and start the VM.

* But, what if number of dirty pages is never "small enough"?\
We would never converge. We would never get to the point where we can stop-and-copy. After a fixed number of iterations, just give up and stop-and-copy.

* Low downtime - if your hopes came true. Otherwise, downtime isn't small.

* But not very suitable when you've a lot of write-intensive applications running.

#### But how do we track the dirtied pages?

* Mark the source VM's memory pages as read-only after each iteration
* Trap write operations via hypervisor to migratin manager and track dirtied pages
* Reset after each iteration
* (shadow page tables are also used for this purpose)

Understandably, this is sort of expensive. So, this approach works well, as long as writes are infrequent.

#### Optimizations

* To avoid interference/impact on running services/VMs on the same machine, limit the bandwidth used by migration
* For write intensive operations - stun rogue processes
  * Pause/slow down the write-intensive process that doesn't stop dirtying memory
  * Possible only in a paravirtualization environment
* A lot of the memory is Free Pages and Cache Pages
  * Cache Pages can be re-cached at target as and when necessary
  * Potential performance hit
  * Reduce amount of network traffic
  * Essentially migrate only the actual pages that need to be migrated

### Post-Copy Migration

* Memory is copied after the CPU, I/O execution states have been transferred (similar to pure-demand paging)
* When you want to migrate, you pause the VM right away. Transfer the CPU and I/O execution state to the destination, and you resume the destination VM even though no memory has been transferred
* Now, the source machine will actively push the pages to the destination machine, while the destination is already up and running. Hopefully, pages reach before page faults occur.
* Very low downtime
* Deterministic total migration time
* Every page is transferred over the network only once
* Cold start penalty at destination - initial memory accesses page faults
* VM state is split across two machines. If migration fails for some reason, then there's no way for the VM to be recovered. It is gone for good.

#### NOTE

Pre-copy has better reliability than Post-copy

### Hybrid pre/post-copy

* Combines benefits and drawbacks of both - sort of a middle ground between both approaches
* Perform one or more rounds of live pre-copy rounds
* Pause VM and transfer execution state
* Use post-copy to transfer any remaining dirty pages from source

## Migrating Network Connections

* Network connection state must also be migrated.
* Not a big probelem as all state of network protocol state is encapsulated within the guest OS in the VM. Migrating the guest OS state, so network connections would automatically transfer over.
  * Migrated VM carries its IP address, MAC address, and all protocl state, including open sockets

* Backward learning/re-learning delay at network switches
  * Switches need to re-learn the new location of migrated VM's MAC address. Otherwise, network will be redirected to the source VM instead of destination VM, which doesn't make sense.
  * This takes some time. VM may not be getting packets for this time. So what to do?\
  Solution - Migration Manager send an ARP reply from the target host over the network. All switches in the network will learn where the new location of VM is as the ARP request propagates over the network.\
  Intermediate switches will re-learn automatially\
  Few in-flight packets may get lost

* Migrating across a WAN
  * VM gets a new IP address in a new subnet. Network identity of VM changes. Need to use adv techniques like tunnelling via VPN, etc.

## Storage Migration

* For LAN\
  We just assumed that the storage is accessible over the network, and remains accessibhle from the new target machine
* For WAN\
  Disk image of the VM may have to be transferred along with the VM, which is much larger, and which will take more time.
  * Pre-copy or Post-copy can be used
  * This can be combined with bandwidth saving optimizations like compression, and/or de-duplication

```markdown
# Note - The following content is from the PPT
```

## "6 steps involved in Live Migration" (basically Pre-Copy migration)

* Step 0 and Step 1 - Pre-Migration and Reservation - Start Migration
  * Makes preparation for migration - determine the migrating VM, and destination host
  * Users can make VMs manually migrate. VM can also be automatically started by strategies like load-balancing/server consolidation
* Step 2 - Iterative pre-copy -  Transfer memory
  * Memory transfer as done above in Pre-Copy
* Step 3 - Stop-and-copy - Suspend VM and copy last portion of data
* Step 4  - Committment
  * Release VM state on Host A
* Step 5 - Activation
  * Run VM on target/destination host
  * Redirect network connection to new VM. Clear all dependencies to source host
  * Resume normal operation of services

## Issues with VM Migration

* Memory Migration
  * Large amounts of memory might need to be migrated (in case of migrations over WAN)\
  Solution - Internet Suspend-Resume technique exploits temporal locality as memory states are likely to have overlap in the suspended and resumed instances of a VM.\
  Memory states differ only by the amount of work done since a VM was last suspended before being initiated for for migration.

* File System Migration
  * System must provide each VM with consistent, location-independent view of File System
    * simple way - provide each VM with its own Virtual Disk to which the file system is mapped. Then, transport contents of this virtual disk along with other states of VM.
    * Another Solution - have global file system across all machines where a VM could be located. All files are network accessible. No need to copy files from one machine to another.

* Network Migration
  * Migrating VM should maintain all open network connections by itself
    * Each VM must be assigned a virtual IP address. This address can be distinct from the IP address of VM's current host machine
    * Each VM can have its own virtual MAC address
    * VMM has mapping of virtual IP and MAC address to corresponding VMs
    * While migrating a VM, you also migrate the protocol states, and carry its IP address with it.
