# Lecture 9


## Docker

* Tool to create containers

### LXC v/s Docker

* LXC containers aren't portable across machines with different configurations. Docker containers are.
* LXC is a virtualization technology that implements namespaces and cgroups for isolation. Docker is a management technology that's a layer on top of LXC
* Docker allows for versioning of images, and image re-use among other features

### Docker Images

* Docker images consists of a series of layers (internally, a layer is treated as an image, and a layer is called an intermediate image).
* Layer - set of files and file metadata packaged and distributed as an atomic unit.
* You can even promote a layer to an image by tagging it.
* Most layers build on a parent layer by applying filesystem changes to the parent, using COW features.
* All layers except top one will be read-only. This thin R/W layer can be used to introduce customizability to existing containers.

### Container Filesystem - UFS

* Processes within the containers doesn't know about the image layers
* From perspective of container, it has exclusive copies of files provided by image. Made possible by UFS.
* Part of critical set of tools that combine to create effective filesystem isolation
* Unionfs permits layering of file systems (determined by order of arguments passed to `/mnt`)
* If `-o cow` option is specified, then `copy on write` kicks in if changes are made to a file. Original file doesn't get modified. New file is created in a hidden location.
* If fs is mounter as `ro` (read only), changes are recorded in a temp location

* Different fs have different rules about names, sizes, file attributes, characters. UFS often need to translate between these different rules (it has to essentially resolve "merge conflicts" from "merging" two fses)
* UFS uses `copy-on-write`, which makes it difficult to implement memory-mapped files
* Most of these issues can be adressed using volumes, without changing storage provider
* Not appropriate for working with long-lived data/data sharing (container-container/container-host)

### Docker + UFS

* Union FS allows you to overlay files from separate FS, forming a single coherent fs. Branches may be read-only/read-write
* Each docker layer is mounted on top of prior layers. The first layer is a base image. This is followed by read-only layer, which essentially builds on images. The top-layer (read-write) makes it a container.
